.TH "g-ir-scanner" 1
.SH NAME
g-ir-scanner \- extracting C metadata from sources and headers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B g-ir-scanner
[OPTION...] FILES...
.SH DESCRIPTION
g-ir-scanner is a tool which generates GIR XML files by parsing headers
and introspecting GObject based libraries.
It is usually invoked during the normal build step for a project and
the information is saved to disk and later installed, so that language bindings
and other applications can use it.
Header files and source files are passed in as arguments on the command line.
The suffix determines whether a file be treated as a source file (.c) or a
header file (.h). Currently only C based libraries are supported by the scanner.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \--help
Show help options
.TP
.B \--quiet
If passed, do not print details of normal operation.
.TP
.B \--warn-all
Display warnings for public API which is not introspectable.
.TP
.B \--warn-error
Make warnings be fatal errors.
.TP
.B \--format=FORMAT
This parameters decides which the resulting format will be used.
The default value is gir.
.TP
.B \--include=NAME
Add the specified introspection dependency to the scanned namespace.
NAME is of the form NAMESPACE-VERSION, like Gtk-3.0.
.TP
.B \--include-uninstalled=PATH
Add the specified introspection dependency to the scanned namespace.
This differs from \--include in that it takes a file path, and
does not process the pkg-config dependencies (since they may not
be installed yet).
.TP
.B \--add-include-path=PATH
Add a directory to the path which the scanner uses to find GIR files.
Can be used multiple times to specify multiple directories
.TP
.B \-i, --library=LIBRARY
Specifies a library that will be introspected. This means that the
*_get_type() functions in it will be called for GObject data types.
The name of the library should not contain the leading lib prefix nor
the ending shared library suffix.
.TP
.B \-L, --library-path=PATH
Include this directory when searching for a library.
This option can be specified multiple times to include more than one
directory to look for libraries in.
.TP
.B \-Idirectory
Include this directory in the list of directories to be searched for
header files.  You need to pass to the scanner all the directories
you'd normally pass to the compiler when using the specified source
files.
.TP
.B \-n, --namespace=NAME
The namespace name. This name should be capitalized, eg the first letter
should be upper case. Examples: Gtk, Clutter, WebKit.
.TP
.B \--no-libtool
Disable usage of libtool for compiling stub introspection binary.  Use this
if your build system does not require libtool.
.TP
.B \--libtool
Full path to libtool executable.  Typically used for Automake systems.
.TP
.B \--nsversion=VERSION
The namespace version. For instance 1.0. This is usually the platform version,
eg 2.0 for Gtk+, not 2.12.7.
.TP
.B \-p, --program=PROGRAM
Specifies a binary that will be introspected. This means that the
*_get_type() functions in it will be called for GObject data types.
The binary must be modified to take a --introspect-dump= option, and
to pass the argument to this function to g_irepository_dump.
.TP
.B \--program-arg=ARG
Additional argument to pass to program for introspection.
.TP
.B \--identifier-prefix=PREFIX
This option may be specified multiple times.  Each one
gives a prefix that will be stripped from all C identifiers.
If none specified, the namespace will be used.
Eg, an identifier prefix of
.B Foo
will export the identifier
.B typdef struct _FooBar FooBar;
as
.B Foo.Bar.
.TP
.B \--symbol-prefix=PREFIX
This option may be specified multiple times.  Each one
gives a prefix that will be stripped from all C symbols.
Eg, an symbol prefix of
.B foo
will export the symbol
.B foo_bar_do_something
as
.B Foo.Bar.do_something.
.TP
.B \--accept-unprefixed
If specified, the scanner will accept identifiers and symbols which
do not match the namespace prefix.  Try to avoid using this if possible.
.TP
.B \--output=FILENAME
Name of the file to output. Normally namespace + format extension.
Eg, GLib-2.0.gir.
.TP
.B \--pkg=PACKAGE
List of pkg-config packages to get compiler and linker flags from.
This option can be specified multiple times to include flags from
several pkg-config packages.
.TP
.B \--pkg-export=PACKAGE
List of pkg-config packages that are provided by the generated gir.
This option can be specified multiple times if the gir provides more
packages.
If not specified, the packages specified with --pkg= will be used.
.TP
.B \--verbose
Be verbose, include some debugging information.
.TP
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The g-ir-scanner uses the XDG_DATA_DIRS variable to check for dirs,
the girs are located in XDG_DATA_DIRS/gir-1.0. It is normally
set on a distribution so you shouldn't need to set it yourself.

The variable GI_SCANNER_DISABLE_CACHE ensures that the scanner will
not write cache data to $HOME.

The variable GI_SCANNER_DEBUG can be used to debug issues in the build-system that
involve g-ir-scanner. When it is set to 'save-temps', then g-ir-scanner will not remove
temporary files and directories after it terminates.

The variable GI_HOST_OS can be used to control the OS name on the
host that runs the scanner. It has the same semantics as the Python
os.name property.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at http://bugzilla.gnome.org/ in the gobject-introspection product.
.SH HOMEPAGE and CONTACT
http://live.gnome.org/GObjectIntrospection
.SH AUTHORS
Johan Dahlin

